Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Today, we're
going to expand matrix theory in a bold new
direction using this new framework for negative
numbers and integers that we've been developing.
We now have control of integers, so we can
use those integers to populate pixels, and
then the pixels populate maxwells. Maxwells are a
replacement for matrices; they are an extension of
the idea of the matrix. We're going to introduce
a new type of object represented by this "max
bracket int," which is a maxwell from integers.
Let me explain what kind of object this is.
Here's an example of it. Here's a maxwell from
integers, and you may recognize that inside it
there are pixels, a pixel being a list of two
numbers. But in this case, the numbers that
are involved are integers: -1, -1, 0, 0, 0, 1,
1, -1, 0, and so on. We have repetitions, which
is alright because we have an M-set: 1, -1, 1, -1,
1, 2. And of course, the order doesn't matter. So,
this is an M-set or multiset of pixels, and a
pixel now is allowed to have integer entries.
We're going to be able to represent this
kind of thing in a new fashion using a screen
representation that extends in all directions
in the plane—a very novel kind of thing. So,
have a look at this representation here.
How does this thing represent that? Well,
first of all, you see these four lines forming
this cross on the page, signifying this special
point here or the special position. This is
the position that corresponds to (0, 0). So,
this is the origin in this screen representation
of pixels. This is the (0, 0) position,
and there are actually a couple of (0,
0) pixels in our multiset, so we count
the multiplicity and put a "2" there. That "2"
represents the number of pixels of the form (0,
0). This "1" here represents the
number of pixels of the form (0, 1).
Okay, so this is the (0, 0) position, this is
the (0, 1) position, this is the (0, 2) position,
this is the (1, 0) position, then the (1, 1),
(1, 2). We're claiming that there is one (0,
1) somewhere, and there it is right there. And
what about this one here? That represents the
position (-1, -1). Alright, so this "1" means that
there is a single (-1, -1), and there it is right
there. In addition, we have three things of the
form (1, -1): (1, -1), (1, -1), (1, -1)—there are
three of them. And also one over here—that's
in the position (1, 2)—that's that one there.
So, this is a record, like a multiplicity
list, of the various pixels that appear
in this maxwell. The novelty is that our
indices are now allowed to be integers,
not starting from 1, not starting from 0 either,
but integers. So, if we were just starting with 1,
then we would really be talking about the
screen that extends below to the right here. So,
this would be the (1, 1) entry: (1, 1),
(1, 2), (1, 3), (2, 1), (2, 2), (2, 3). So,
here's sort of standard matrix theory, if
you like, there. And then extending to zeros,
allowing 0 as an index, we would have this larger
screen that includes this border. But now, today,
we're going further, and we're allowing
integers, including negative numbers, in the
vertical direction and also in the horizontal
direction—these are maxwells from integers.
Okay, so let's make the official definitions.
We're working in this context where we have
integers consisting of both natural numbers
and negative numbers. Here are some examples
of integers: there is the integer that
we would normally call 5—it's actually
a natural number. Here's the integer that
we normally call -3—it's a negative number.
Here's our empty set or empty multiset, which
is the zero number. Okay, so we're not going
to always use our marks and anti-marks to
construct numbers because then our M-sets
that we're illustrating would end up looking
very hard and complicated for us. A computer
wouldn't necessarily have any problem dealing
with these kinds of things, but we prefer to
deal with our ordinary Hindu-Arabic numerals.
But we're going to always consider these to
be just replacements for the fundamental
objects, which are integers of this form.
And then the definition is that a pixel from
integers is now a two-list from int. Okay,
a pixel from integers is a two-list from int,
and here is the type of pixel from integer. So,
for example, this thing here is a list because
it has two elements with a comma there—the first
element is an integer, the second element
is also an integer. We would more routinely
write this in the shorter form as the list
(4, -1). Here's an anti-mark in that M-set,
which means it's actually -1. So,
this is a pixel from integers.
And then a maxwell from integers is an M-set of
these pixels from integers, and the type is max
int. So, for example, here is a maxwell from
integers—it's a multiset consisting of a lot
of pixels, and the pixels are from integers. You
can see they have integer entries, and there are
two lists—they each have a pair of entries. So now
it's natural for us to extend our representation
of maxwells from what we formerly considered in
terms of natural numbers to these integers as
indices. For that, we move to the integer screen,
which is basically the entire page extending in
all directions. Prominently, we have these four
lines represented by these two vertical ones and
these two horizontal ones that will sort of
frame this screen and tell us where we are.
Okay, so let's make sure that we know where the
labels all fit. Each one of these little boxes is
the home of a pixel from integers. Prominently,
the first one and the most important is the
origin of this picture, the (0, 0) pixel—it's
right in the middle of these four lines. Then,
as we go down, the first coordinate increases,
just like for ordinary matrices: (0, 0), (1,
0), (2, 0). Correspondingly, if we go up, we
decrease to become negative-valued: (-1, 0), (-2,
0), (-3, 0), and so on. If we move to the right,
then the second entry increases, so we go (0, 1),
(0, 2), (0, 3), and so on. And if we move to the
left, then it becomes (0, -1), (0, -2), and so on.
Down here, we have (1, 1), (1, 2),
(1, 3), (2, 1), (2, 2), (2, 3),
(3, 1), (3, 2), (3, 3), and so on. So here is
the sort of more familiar framework for matrices,
and now we're extending everything to the integer
domain. Note that we've made some special markings
here for the diagonal elements: (0, 0), (1, 1),
(2, 2), (3, 3), along with the negative ones:
(-1, -1), (-2, -2), and so on. They
play a particularly important role. So,
this diagonal is distinguished by going
through our distinguished central square.
This is now the new framework for linear
algebra, okay? It's a 21st-century framework
for linear algebra, encompassing familiar matrix
theory but also extending it in a very important
new direction. And so now, of course, we can
represent a maxwell on our new screen just by
recording the various multiplicities of the pixels
that occur. So let's have a look at this example.
Here is a maxwell—it's a multiset of pixels
from integers, and we want to record how many
pixels there are in this multiset of different
kinds. So, we might start with this one here,
the first one that's pictured, although remember
this thing is unordered, so it's not necessarily
the case that things are organized in a coherent
way here. But here we see the pixel (-2, -1). Now,
where is that going to be? Well, here is (0,
0). If we go up in the vertical direction,
we are decreasing the first entry—so vertical is
the first entry here. So there's 0, there's -1,
there's -2. And then if we want to go -1 in
the horizontal direction, it means we're over
here. So this pixel is represented by this
little portion of the screen, and how many
of them are there? There are 2. So there are
two of them, so I'm taking care of those two.
How about (-1, 2)? Well, that would be -1 in
the vertical direction and 2 in the horizontal
direction, so we're over here. And how many of
those are there? Just the one. How about (0,
-1)? So, 0 in that direction, -1 in the
horizontal direction—that's right there,
and there are one, two, three of them. (1, 1) is
one of them, (2, -1), so that's two down and then
one across—there are four of them. And (0, 3):
(0, 0), (0, 1), (0, 2), (0, 3)—is one of them.
To make this maybe more readable, I could fill
in the rest with some zeros to structure the
thing a bit more clearly, give it some more shape,
although strictly speaking, I don't really need to
do this because I'm just recording which pixels
are there, and there's no obligation for me to
record everything in a nice little rectangular
array. I can do so if I like, but I don't have to.
So that would be one reasonable representation,
if I've done it correctly, of this maxwell, M.
Now, over here, I want to also indicate the
support of this maxwell. So, the support of a
maxwell is a set of pixels—the set of pixels
that actually occur in the maxwell. It's one
way of thinking about that: we're stripping
away all multiplicities and just considering
all things that actually occur. So, in
this story, what's occurring is (-2, -1),
which is that first one there, and here that
would be up here—let's draw a little square
there—that one's appearing. Then we had (-1,
2)—that was this one here—now it's occurring.
And then this one over here—that one's occurring,
that's the (0, 3). And we also had this one here,
that's (0, -1)—that was occurring three times,
so we'll record it. And there was also the (1,
1), which is down here, and
the (2, 1), which is down here.
Okay, so if I actually sort of
really make this a bit clearer,
so we can represent the set of pixels that occur
by just recording the non-zero multiplicities,
and we could call that F of M, short
for frame. So in the previous video,
I talked about sets of pixels as being frames.
So this multiset has this as its frame,
and another notation that I introduced is
that the support of the maxwell is this frame.
So, we're proposing a very big change here
because matrix operations, matrix multiplication,
and algebra are just workhorses of modern
mathematics. Someone like me, a professional
mathematician, will have done thousands and
thousands of matrix calculations in my career,
and even undergraduate students will do dozens
if not hundreds of matrix calculations. So,
it's a big shift to start thinking, first of
all, of matrices not just contained in little
rectangular boxes but sort of spread out. And
also, even more perhaps novel, the idea that
the extent of these boxes can range also over
integer indices. So, it's a big shift going from
this corner screen point of view that we started
with to now this full integer screen point of
view towards maxwells. It's a big shift, and it
certainly requires some conceptual adjustment.
And I'd like to just point out that this kind
of thing has some precedent. If we go back
three or four hundred years to Descartes'
time, where Cartesian coordinate geometry
was really first introduced, Descartes was
very reluctant to think about geometry on an
entire plane in the coordinate sense. He much
preferred to think in terms of quadrants. So,
he would divide the plane up into four quadrants
and say this positive quadrant—that one is
comfortable because he can label the indices with
positive numbers. So, back in Descartes' day,
negative numbers were viewed with some suspicion.
Yes, one could see that they were useful
for certain things, especially describing
debts, but their geometrical significance,
their essential mathematical significance,
was not entirely so familiar as it is today.
So, what we're really doing is, I suppose,
proposing an algebraic analog of going from
this geometrical story to the more familiar
full-plane story of modern Cartesian geometry—an
analog of that in the algebraic setting in terms
of studying matrices and linear algebra. So,
of course, now we want to do algebra with these
more general kinds of matrices or maxwells,
and the operations are the basic
ones of addition and multiplication.
Addition is relatively straightforward because
addition is really component-wise—we're
just adding multisets. And in the screen
representation, that just corresponds to adding
multiplicities at every single pixel position. So,
if we want to add this maxwell with this maxwell,
we're going to get this maxwell, which is just
the sum of all the various multiplicities in
each position. And of course, it's important
that we keep the positions coherent so that we
recognize this is the (0, 0) position, this
is the (0, 0) position, and here is the (0,
0) position here. So, this entry plus this entry
has to be this entry. Correspondingly, this 3 plus
this 1 gives us this 4, this 1 plus 0 gives us
1, this 0, which is implicit there but we haven't
written it down, plus this 5 gives us 5. And
similarly, we get a 1 here, and a 2 plus 1 is 3.
So, addition is very straightforward—it's really
the same kind of story. And multiplication,
in some sense, is also straightforward because
it's exactly the same definition as we had before.
Here is our fundamental multiplication
of pixels: pixel (k, l) times pixel (m,
n) gives us either the pixel (k, n) in case
l equals m, or otherwise it gives us nothing,
represented by a real nothing—no zero, no dot,
no symbol, just emptiness. That's crucial for
us when we're working with multisets: to be able
to multiply this object and this object and get
nothing that we're going to put in the resulting
multiset. So, this story crucially involves the
distinguished use of nothing in this somewhat
novel setting and sense that we're proposing.
So, let's have a look at an example of
maxwell multiplication. Here is a maxwell,
M, and here is maxwell, N. We want to multiply
them. So, the definition of multiplication at
the maxwell level is just the max extension of
the pixel multiplication. So, we are obliged
to multiply each of the pixels in the first
M-set, which is M, with each of the pixels in
the second M-set, which is N. For example, we have
to multiply this pixel first with this one. Well,
in order to do that, we have to look at the
second entry here, the first entry here,
and ask: are they the same? They are not the same
because 1 and -1 are different, so the product
of this pixel with this pixel is empty, and it
contributes nothing to the final product. So here,
we get nothing, here we get nothing, here we
get nothing, nothing. But this product here,
we get something because that 1 and that 1 agree,
and so the product is going to be (-2, 4), okay?
Then we move to the next pixel and do the
same thing—well, it's exactly the same as the
previous one, so we're going to get another
(-2, 4). When we move to this one (1, -1),
we look through here—how many of them agree in
their first entry with the second entry here? So,
we look for a -1 again, and we see
there's two of them, and so we get a (1,
2) in this product here, and another (1, 2)
from this product here. And then finally,
this pixel times all of these, and we're
only going to get something when we multiply
this one with this one because those ones
agree, and we will get the result of (0, 4).
This is what it looks like at the M-set level,
but most of the time, we'll probably be working
in this screen kind of representation. So, here
is the maxwell represented on our screen—there's
a (-2, 1) twice, there's a (1, -1), (1, -1) right
there, and there's a (0, 1) over there. And the
second one is (-1, 2)—so (-1) in this direction,
(2) in this direction, and there's a 2 down,
there's a 2 there. Then there's (0, 1) twice—this
(0, 1) position two times. And there's also one
further down and then one, two, three, four
over. And the final product is this thing here.
Well, it may seem quite different from the matrix
multiplication that you're used to, but in fact,
it's not really so different. We'll see this a
little more next time. Here's a way of thinking
about it that maybe makes it a little bit clearer:
suppose we fill in this thing to make it a little
bit more like a rectangular array, save that one
there, and let's do the same thing over here.
And we'll fill up also some zeros here.
So what one can do is think about having arrays,
and actually, it's best to go over one more so
that we're in a diagonal situation—then
we get a better correspondence with the
usual matrix multiplication. So, let's go
over there—I've now gone over to the (-2,
-2) entry on the top. Then, if I kind of put a
border here and a border here and a border here,
then you can convince yourself that
this product here is this one here,
in the sense of just doing sort of ordinary
matrix multiplication on these traditional
bordered maxwells. So, for example, this
entry here is the result of taking this
row here and this column here and going
(0, 0, 0, 2)—that's how we get that one.
You don't have to do this, but if you
want to connect a little more directly
with your intuition about ordinary matrix
multiplication, this is one way of proceeding.
We'll have a look at this kind of thing
in a little bit more generality next time.
So here's a little exercise for you, finally,
to practice a bit of matrix multiplication:
suppose that M is this particular maxwell—it's
a bit symmetrical—and here's another one,
also symmetrical, called N.
Have some fun finding powers:
M to the k, N to the k for various
powers for these two maxwells.
In our next video, we want to understand this
algebra a little bit better. We want to connect
this new kind of maxwell theory with the previous
one that we had—the more limited one where we were
just talking about maxwells from natural numbers.
We'll see that many of the same concepts apply and
have a very rich algebraic
structure, and in some ways,
a more symmetrical and aesthetically
pleasing one than we had before. So,
really new and exciting directions for
matrix theory and, in fact, linear algebra.
I hope you'll join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.